QUESTION 6

Task 1. Upon examining the histogram of week nights variable, we observe a right-skewed distribution,
indicating non-normal data. Hence, the majority of the data is concentrated in the first third
of x-axis, indicating the presence of outliers, that strongly influence this distribution type.
The x-axis ranges from 0 to 15, with the lowest number of stays being 0 and the highest being 17. 
The figure's peak is at 2, indicating that on average, guests stayed for 2 nights most frequently, 
followed by 1 night of stay. The density plot reveals harmonic type of distribution, which is due
to the fact that this variable is a discrete type rather than continous. 

Task 3. Firstly, we needed to determine if the lead time variable had a normal distribution within
each room and meal plan type. We accomplished this by visually examining the density plots.  
The first density plot in the upper left corner shows, that the distribution of each 
room type is skewed heavily to the right, indicating a non-parametric distribution.
In the case of the meal plan, most groups have a flat distribution with more data values on the tails,
except for the groups 3, which has a pointy distribution with skewness to the right, resulting in the overall non-parametric distribution. Secondly, the density pllot on the right displays the room type
groups distrbutions in relation to the average room price. From this we can observe that group
3 and 7 have flat distributions, while group 2 has a peaked one, indicating low and high curtosis,
respectively. Although room type 6 appears to be closest to the normal distribution,
the distributions of the majority of the room type still appear to be non-normally distributed.
In the previous task, we discovered the abnormal distribution of group 2 and 3 in the case of
meal plans. Considering that both numerical variables are not normally distributed within
each type of rooms and meal plans, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test in order to compare the medians
of these groups. The output in both cases show that the p-value is less than significance level
(p = 0.000), meaning, that we reject the null hypothesis stating that the medians of lead time and
average price per room are equal across all type of rooms and meals. Thus, we conclude, that there is
a significant difference in lead time and average price per room across the room types and meal
plans. 
